feat: update the unpublished state (#1226)
graasp/graasp: src/services/item/plugins/publication/README.md

# Publication Process

> This document outlines the publication process for items within the Library system. Due to the involvement of multiple services, this specification covers all relevant services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document outlines the publication process for items, covering all relevant services (Publication, Validation).
```
you can correct the service's names.

## Publication Service

> The `PublicationService` calculates the current publication status of an item. This information is crucial for other services to determine appropriate actions, such as rejecting queries or returning status details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `PublicationService` computes the current publication status of an item. This information is crucial for other services to determine appropriate actions, such as rejecting queries or returning status details.
```

The service determines a `PublicationStatus`, defined in the SDK, for each item. Below is a description of the possible statuses:

- **PublishedChildren**: The item is a child of a published parent, and its publication is managed through the parent.

>   - Preventing children publication when the parent is already published, are currently implemented only in the frontend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Preventing children publication when the parent is already published, is currently implemented only in the frontend.
```
I would actually highlight this part with a warning, or link an issue for a future implementation.

- **ItemTypeNotAllowed**: The item's type cannot be published.

>   - Currently only folders are allowed to be published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Only folders are allowed to be published.
```

> - **Unpublished**: The item is not yet published in the Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Unpublished**: The item is not yet published.
```

  - This is the default state for new items.
  - Validation is required before publication.

> - **Outdated**: The item is currently published but has been updated, necessitating re-validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Outdated**: The item is currently published but has been updated, requiring the item to be validated again.
```

>   - Currently, outdated items remain in the Library without removal, but this behavior might change to include a warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Outdated items remain published despite being outdated.
```

- **Invalid**: The item contains invalid content and has been rejected.
- **Pending**: The item's validation is in progress.

>   - Successful validation transitions the item to Published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Successful validation transitions the item to `Published`.
```

>   - Invalid validation transitions the item to Invalid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Invalid validation transitions the item to `Invalid`.
```

- **NotPublic**: The item is published but has private visibility.

> - **Published**: The item is successfully published in the Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Published**: The item is successfully published.
```

>   - Updating the item changes the status to Outdated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Updating the item changes the status to `Outdated`.
```

>   - Unpublishing changes it to ReadyToPublish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Unpublishing changes it to `ReadyToPublish`.
```

- **ReadyToPublish**: The item is unpublished but has passed validation.

>   - If not updated, it transitions to Published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If not updated, it transitions to `Published`.
```

>   - Updating the item reverts the status to Unpublished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Updating the item reverts the status to `Unpublished`.
```

    if_item_not_allowed --> ItemTypeNotAllowed: No
    if_item_not_allowed --> IsParentPublished: Yes
    IsParentPublished --> if_published_child
    if_published_child --> PublishedChildren: Yes
    if_published_child --> Unpublished: No
    Unpublished --> Pending : validate
    Pending --> Published : valid
    Pending --> Invalid : invalid
    ReadyToPublish --> Published: publish
    ReadyToPublish --> Unpublished: update
    Published --> Outdated : update
    Published --> ReadyToPublish : unpublish
    Published --> NotPublic: private
    Published --> [*]
    Outdated --> Pending : revalidate
    Invalid --> [*]
    NotPublic --> Published: public
    PublishedChildren --> [*]
    ItemTypeNotAllowed --> [*]
```

- **Endpoint:** `GET /items/publications/:itemId`
  - **Description:** Gets the status of the item's publication.
  - **Permissions:** Only **admin** members of the item can access this route.
  - **Responses:**
    - `200 OK`: The item exists.
    - `401 Not Authorized`: If the user is not authenticated.
    - `403 Forbidden`: If the user is not administrator of the item.
    - `404 Not Found`: If the item is not found.

## Validation service

> The `ValidationService` allows to validate an item or to retrieve an item's validation. This service is crucial to ensure that an item is validated before publishing it in the Graasp's Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ValidationService` allows to validate an item or to retrieve an item's validation. This service is crucial to ensure that an item is validated before publishing it.
```

- **Endpoint:** `POST /items/:itemId/validations`
  - **Description:** Validates the item's content.
  - **Permissions:** Only **admin** members of the item can access this route.
  - **Behavior:**

>     - Validation is asynchronous with websocket feedback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Validation is asynchronous. Websocket feedbacks are sent to the frontend ....
```
complete with websocket messages, doesn't have to be precise, but would be helpful to know when.

>     - Successful validation automatically publishes the item to the Graasp Library (private items become public).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Successful validation automatically publishes the item.
    - Private items become public.
```

  - **Responses:**
    - `202 Accepted`: Validation process started successfully.
    - `401 Not Authorized`: If the user is not authenticated.
    - `403 Forbidden`: If the user is not administrator of the item.
    - `404 Not Found`: If the item is not found.

## Publish service

> The `PublishService` manages the item's publications in the Graasp's Library. An item should be validated to be published in the Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `PublishService` manages the item's publications. An item should be validated to be published.
```

- **Endpoint:** `POST /items/:itemId/collections`

>   - **Description:** Publishes the item to the Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Description:** Publishes the item.
```

  - **Responses:**
    - `200 OK`: Item successfully published.
    - `401 Not Authorized`: If the user is not authenticated.
    - `403 Forbidden`: If the user is not administrator of the item.
    - `404 Not Found`: If the item is not found.
- **Endpoint:** `DELETE /items/:itemId/collections`

>   - **Description:** Unpublishes the item from the Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Description:** Unpublishes the item.
```

# Publication Process

This document outlines the publication process for items, covering all relevant services (Publication, Published and Validation services).

## Publication Service

The `PublicationService` computes the current publication status of an item. This information is crucial for other services to determine appropriate actions, such as rejecting queries or returning status details.

> This service use the `Item`, `ItemTag`, `ItemValidationGroup` and `ItemPublished` entities to compute the item's state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This service uses the `Item`, `ItemTag`, `ItemValidationGroup` and `ItemPublished` entities to compute the item's state.
```

> The service determines a `PublicationStatus`, defined in the SDK, for each item. Below is a description of the possible statuses:

Reviewer: item's state = Publication status right? Maybe we can merge these sentences.

  - Updating the item reverts the status to `Unpublished`.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state if_published_child <<choice>>
    state if_item_not_allowed <<choice>>
    [*] --> if_item_not_allowed: Is Item Allowed ?
    if_item_not_allowed --> ItemTypeNotAllowed: No
    if_item_not_allowed --> if_published_child: Is Parent Published ?
    if_published_child --> PublishedChildren: Yes
    if_published_child --> Unpublished: No
    Unpublished --> Pending : validate
    Pending --> Published : valid
    Pending --> Invalid : invalid
    Invalid --> Pending : revalidate
    ReadyToPublish --> Published: publish
    ReadyToPublish --> Unpublished: update
    Published --> Outdated : update
    Published --> ReadyToPublish : unpublish
    Outdated --> Pending : revalidate

    Outdated --> [*]
    ItemTypeNotAllowed --> [*]
    Invalid --> [*]
    Published --> [*]
    PublishedChildren --> [*]
    Unpublished --> [*]
    ReadyToPublish --> [*]
```

- **Endpoint:** `GET /items/publications/:itemId`
  - **Description:** Gets the status of the item's publication.
  - **Permissions:** Only **admin** members of the item can access this route.
  - **Responses:**

>     - `200 OK`: The item exists.

Reviewer: Might be interesting to define the structure? Or at least the type name.

  - **Behavior:**
    - Validation is asynchronous. Websocket feedbacks are sent to the frontend (`ItemOpFeedbackEvent('validate', [itemId], { [item.id]: item })`).
    - Successful validation automatically publishes the item (the publication state become `Published`).
    - Private items become public.
  - **Responses:**
    - `202 Accepted`: Validation process started successfully.
    - `401 Not Authorized`: If the user is not authenticated.
    - `403 Forbidden`: If the user is not administrator of the item.
    - `404 Not Found`: If the item is not found.

## Publish service

The `ItemPublishedService` manages the item's publications. An item should be validated to be published.

- **Endpoint:** `POST /items/:itemId/collections`
  - **Description:** Publishes the item.
  - **Permissions:** Only **admin** members of the item can access this route.
  - **Behavior:**
    - If the item is valid, the publication state become `Published`.
    - If it's a valid parent, all its children become `PublishedChildren`.
      - That means the children cannot be published.
      - The publication can only be managed by the parent.
> [!WARNING]

> > If a children is already published, it's still published as a single item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If a child is already published, it's still published as a single item.
```
